Efficient object store for the AiiDA repository (#11)
aiidateam/AEP: 006_efficient_object_store_for_repository/readme.md

  The time to retrieve all of them is \~2.2s when using a single bulk call, compared to \~44.5s when using 100'000 independent calls (still probably acceptable).
  Moreover, even getting, in 10 bulk calls, 10 random chunks of the objects (eventually covering the whole set of 100'000 objects) only takes \~3.4s.
  This should demonstrate that exporting a subset of the graph should be efficient.
  Also, this should be compared to minutes to hours when storing each object as individual files.

- All operations internally (storing to a loose object, storing to a pack, reading from a loose object or from a pack, compression) should happen via streaming (at least internally, and there should be a public facing API for this).
  So, even when dealing with huge files, these never fill the RAM (e.g. when reading or writing a multi-GB file, the memory usage has been tested to be capped at \~150MB).
  Convenience methods are available, anyway, to get directly an object content, if the user wants this for simplicty, and knows that the content fits in RAM.

#### Further design choices

- The key of an object will be its hash.

>   For each container, one can decide which hash algorithm to use; the default one is `sha256` that offers a good compromise between speed and avoiding risk of collisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For each container, one can decide which hash algorithm to use; the default one is `sha256`, which offers a good compromise between speed and avoiding risk of collisions.
```

  Once an object is stored, it's the responsibility of the `disk-objectstore` library to return the hash of the object that was just stored.

- Using a hash means that we automatically get deduplication of content: if an object is asked to be written, once the stream is received, if the library detects that the object is already present, it will still return the hash key but not store it twice.
  So, from the point of view of the end application (AiiDA), it does not need to know that deduplication is performed: it just has to send a sequence of bytes, and store the corresponding hash key returned by the library.

> - The hashing library can be decided for each container and is configurable; however, for performance reasons, in AiiDA it will be better to decide and stick to one only algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The hashing library can be decided for each container and is configurable; however, for performance reasons, in AiiDA it will be better to decide and stick to only one algorithm.
```

  This will allow to compare e.g. two different repositories (e.g. when sharing data and/or syncing) and establish if data already exists by just comparing the hashes.
  If different hash algorithms are instead used by the two containers, one needs to do a full data transfer of the whole container, to discover if new data needs to be transfered or not.

- Pack naming and strategy is not determined by the user.
  Anyway it would be difficult to provide easy options to the user to customize the behavior, while implementing a packing strategy that is efficient.

>   Which object is in which pack is tracked in the SQLite database.
>   But at the moment it does not seem necessary.

Reviewer: Is the following really true though? Tracking which object is in which pack _is_ necessary, isn't it?
```suggestion
  Which object is in which pack is tracked in the SQLite database, even though at the moment it does not seem necessary.
```

Author: Yes, sorry, a leftover from the first version where object keys were UUIDs and the pack was obtained from the first two characters of the UUID.

>   Possible future changes of the internal packing format should not affect the users of the library, since users only ask to get an object by hash key, and in general they do not need to know if they are getting a loose object, a packed object, from which pack, ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Possible future changes of the internal packing format should not affect the users of the library, since users only ask to get an object by hash key, and in general they do not need to know if they are getting a loose object, a packed object, from which pack, etc.
```

> - For each object, the SQLite database contains the following fields, that can be considered to be the "metadata" of the packed object: its key (`hashkey`), the `offset` (starting
>   position of the bytestream in the pack file), the `length` (number of bytes to read), a boolean `compressed` flag, meaning if the bytestream has been zlib-compressed, and the `size` of the actual data (equal to `length` if `compressed` is false, otherwise the size of the uncompressed stream, useful for statistics for instance, or to inform the reader beforehand of how much data will be returned, before it starts reading, so the reader can decide to store in RAM the whole object or to process it in a streaming way).
>   In addition, it tracks the number of the pack in which the object is stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For each object, the SQLite database contains the following fields, that can be considered to be the "metadata" of the packed object: its `hashkey`, the `offset` (starting position of the bytestream in the pack file), the `length` (number of bytes to read), a boolean `compressed` flag, meaning if the bytestream has been zlib-compressed, and the `size` of the actual data (which is equal to `length` if `compressed` is false, or the size of the uncompressed stream otherwise).
The latter is useful for statistics for instance, or to inform the reader beforehand of how much data will be returned, before it starts reading, so the reader can decide to store the whole object in RAM or to process it in a streaming way.
  In addition, it tracks the number of the pack in which the object is stored.
```

- We decided to use SQLite because of the following reasons:
  - it's a database, so it's efficient in searching for the metadata of a given object;
  - it does not require a running server;
  - in [WAL mode](https://www.sqlite.org/wal.html), allows many concurrent readers and one writer, useful to allow to continue normal operations by many Unix processes during repacking;
  - we access it via the SQLAlchemy library that anyway is already a dependency of AiiDA, and is actually the only dependency of the current object-store implementation;

>   - it's quite widespread and so the libary to read and write should be reliable; in addition, SQLite has a clear [long-term support planning](https://www.sqlite.org/lts.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - it's quite widespread and so the libary to read and write should be reliable;
  - SQLite has a clear [long-term support planning](https://www.sqlite.org/lts.html).
```

> - Deletion can just occur efficiently as either a deletion of the loose object, or a removal from the index file (if the object is already packed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deletion can be performed efficiently by simply deleting the loose object, or removing the entry from the index file if the object is already packed.
```

  Later repacking of the packs can be used to recover the disk space still occupied in the pack files.
  It is hard to find a better strategy that does not require manual repacking but gives all other guarantees especially for fast live operations (as a reference, also essentially all databases do the same and have a "vacuum" operation that is in a sense equivalent to the concept of repacking here).

- The object store does not need to provide functionality to modify an object.
  In AiiDA, files of nodes are typically only added, and once added they are immutable (and very rarely they can be deleted).
  

>   If modification is needed, this can be achieved by creation of a new object and deletion of the old one, since this is an extremely rare operation (actually it should never happen).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If modification is needed, this can be achieved by creation of a new object and deletion of the old one, but this is expected to be a extremely rarely needed operation.
```

> - The current packing format is `rsync`-friendly (that is one of the original requirements).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The current packing format is `rsync`-friendly, which is one of the original requirements.
```

>   `rsync` has a clever rolling algorithm that can divides each file in blocks and detects if the same block is already in the destination file, even at a different position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `rsync` has a clever rolling algorithm that divides each file in blocks and detects if the same block is already in the destination file, even at a different position.
```

  Therefore, if content is appended to a pack file, or even if a pack is "repacked" (e.g. reordering objects inside it, or removing deleted objects) this does not prevent efficient rsync transfer (this has been tested in the implementation).

> - Since it works on a filesystem backend, this would allow to use also other tools, e.g. [`rclone`](https://rclone.org), to move the data to some different backend (a "real" object store, Google Drive, or anything else).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Since the `disk-objectstore` works on a normal file system, it is possible to use also other tools, e.g. [`rclone`](https://rclone.org), to move the data to some different backend (a "real" object store, Google Drive, or anything else).
```

- Appending content to a single file does not prevent the Linux disk cache to work efficiently.
  Indeed, the caches are per blocks/pages in linux, not per file.

>   Concatenating to files does not impact performance on cache efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Concatenating to files does not impact performance of cache efficiency.
```

  What is costly is opening a file, as the filesystem has to provide some guarantees e.g. on concurrent access.

>   As a note, seeking a file to a given position is what one typically does when watching a video and jumping to a different section.

Reviewer: which is efficient? Is that the counterpoint you are trying to make? I would make that explicit then, but not 100% sure that is what you were trying to say
```suggestion
  As a note, seeking a file to a given position is what one typically does when watching a video and jumping to a different section, which is an efficient operation.
```

- Packing in general, at this stage, is left to the user.
  We can decide (at the object-store level, or probably better at the AiiDA level) to suggest the user to repack, or to trigger the repacking automatically.
  This can be a feature introduced at a second time.
  For instance, the first version we roll out could just suggest to repack periodically in the docs.
  This could be a good approach, also to bind the repacking with the backups (at the moment, probably backups need to be executed using appropriate scripts to backup the DB index and the repository in the "right order", and possibly using SQLite functions to get a dump).

- As a note: even if repacking is never done by the user, the situation is anyway improved with respect to the current one in AiiDA:

>   - an index of files associated with an AiiDA node will now be stored in the AiiDA DB, so getting the list of files associated to a node without content will not need anymore to access the disk;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - an index of files associated with an AiiDA node will now be stored in the AiiDA DB, so getting the list of files associated to a node without content will no longer need access to the disk;
```

>   - there wouldn't be anymore empty folders created for nodes without files;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - empty folders created for nodes without files will no longer be created;
```

  - automatic deduplication of the data is now done transparently.
  
  In a second phase, we can print suggestions, e.g. when restarting the daemon, that suggests to repack, for instance if the number of loose objects is too large.
  We will also provide `verdi` commands to facilitate the user in these maintenance operations.

  Finally, in the future if we are confident that this approach works fine, we can also automate the repacking.
  We need to be careful that two different processes don't start packing at the same time, and that the user is aware that packing will be triggered, that it might take some time, and that the packing process should not be killed (this might be inconvenient, and this is why I would think twice before implementing an automatic repacking).

### Why a custom implementation of the library
We have been investigating if existing codes could be used for the current purpose.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

However, in our preliminary analysis we couldn't find an existing robust software that was satisfying all criteria.
In particular:

> - existing object storage implementations (e.g. Open Stack Swift, or others that typically provide a S3 or similar API) are not suitable since 1) they require a server running, and we would like to avoid the complexity of asking users to run yet another server, and most importantly 2) they usually work via a REST API that is extremely inefficient when retrieving a lot of small objects (latencies can be even of tens of ms, that is clearly unacceptable if we want to retrieve millions of objects).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- existing object storage implementations (e.g. Open Stack Swift, or others that typically provide a S3 or similar API) are not suitable since 1) they require a server running, and we would like to avoid the complexity of asking users to run yet another server, and most importantly 2) they usually work via a REST API that is extremely inefficient when retrieving a lot of small objects (latencies can be even of tens of ms, which is clearly unacceptable if we want to retrieve millions of objects).
```

> - the closest tool we could find is the git object store, for which there exists also a pure-python implementation ([dulwich](https://github.com/dulwich/dulwich)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the closest tool we could find is the git object store, for which there exists also a pure Python implementation ([dulwich](https://github.com/dulwich/dulwich)).
```

  We have been benchmarking it, but the feeling is that it is designed to do something else, and adapting to our needs might not be worth it.

>   Some examples of issues we envision: managing re-packing (dulwich can only pack loose objects, but not repack existing packs); this can be done via git itself, but then we need to ensuring that when repacking, objects are not garbage-collected and deleted because they are not referenced within git.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Some examples of issues we envision: managing re-packing (dulwich can only pack loose objects, but not repack existing packs); this can be done via git itself, but then we need to ensure that when repacking, objects are not garbage-collected and deleted because they are not referenced within git.
```

  Also we did not test concurrency access and packing of the git repository, which requires some stress test to assess if it works.

- One possible solution could be a format like HDF5.
  However we need a very efficient hash-table like access (given a key, get the object), while HDF5 is probably designed to append data to the last dimension of a multidimensional array. Variables exist, but (untested) probably they cannot scale well at the scale of tens of millions.

- One option we didn't investigate is the mongodb object store.
  Note that this would require running a server though (but could be acceptable if for other reasons it becomes advantageous).

## Pros and Cons 

### Pros
* Is very efficient also with hundreds of thousands of objects (bulk reads can read all objects in a couple of seconds).
* Is rsync-friendly, so one can suggest to use directly rsync for backups instead of custom scripts.
* A library (`disk-objectstore`) has already been implemented, seems to be very efficient, and is relatively short (and already has tests with 100% coverage, including concurrent writes, reads, and one repacking process, and checking on three platforms: linux, mac os, and windows).

> * It does not add any additional python depenency to AiiDA, and it does not require a service running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It does not add any additional Python depenency to AiiDA, and it does not require a service running.
```

  So, from the point of view of the end application (AiiDA), it does not need to know that deduplication is performed: it just has to send a sequence of bytes, and store the corresponding hash key returned by the library.

- The hashing library can be decided for each container and is configurable; however, for performance reasons, in AiiDA it will be better to decide and stick to only one algorithm.
  This will allow to compare e.g. two different repositories (e.g. when sharing data and/or syncing) and establish if data already exists by just comparing the hashes.
  If different hash algorithms are instead used by the two containers, one needs to do a full data transfer of the whole container, to discover if new data needs to be transfered or not.

- Pack naming and strategy is not determined by the user.
  Anyway it would be difficult to provide easy options to the user to customize the behavior, while implementing a packing strategy that is efficient.
  Which object is in which pack is tracked in the SQLite database.

>   But at the moment it does not seem necessary.
>   Possible future changes of the internal packing format should not affect the users of the library, since users only ask to get an object by hash key, and in general they do not need to know if they are getting a loose object, a packed object, from which pack, etc.

Author: ```suggestion
  Possible future changes of the internal packing format should not affect the users of the library, since users only ask to get an object by hash key, and in general they do not need to know if they are getting a loose object, a packed object, from which pack, etc.
```
